RFC XXX: Add `?feature=` query parameter to `testdriver.js` (#214)
web-platform-tests/rfcs: rfcs/testdriver-features.md

    }, "Assert testdriver can subscribe and receive events");
```

```javascript
// META: script=/resources/testdriver.js?feature=bidi

'use strict';

promise_test(async () => {
    const some_message = "SOME MESSAGE";
     // Subscribe to `log.entryAdded` BiDi events. This will not add a listener to the page.
    await test_driver.bidi.log.entry_added.subscribe();
    // Add a listener for the log.entryAdded event. This will not subscribe to the event, so the subscription is
    // required before. The cleanup is done automatically after the test is finished.
    const log_entry_promise = test_driver.bidi.log.entry_added.once();
    // Emit a console.log message.
    // Note: Lint rule is disabled in `lint.ignore` file.
    console.log(some_message);
    // Wait for the log.entryAdded event to be received.
    const event = await log_entry_promise;
    // Assert the log.entryAdded event has the expected message.
    assert_equals(event.args.length, 1);
    const event_message = event.args[0];
    assert_equals(event_message.value, some_message);
}, "Assert testdriver can subscribe and receive events");
```

### Required changes

#### Features

> The `testrdriver_features` is a list of values of query parameters with the name `feature`, used when the `testdriver.js` is imported. It has to be passed from `SourceFile` through `TestharnessTest` to `Test`, where it can be consumed by the specific test runners.

Reviewer: Is testrdriver_features a new concept? or does it already exist?

Author: it's new

The test runner can use the `Test`’s `testrdriver_features` property to determine whether to enable BiDi support for the test.

Even though the `TestExecutor` needs information about whether to activate BiDi or not at `connect`, which happens before the runner receives the test to run, the configuration can be done at the point [the browser is configured](https://github.com/web-platform-tests/wpt/pull/48618/files#diff-0df24b5b583c460182e687f7dc7a6a79dd2cd3389bc4a96f48483f60fceb51f7R272). This data can be used later by the specific executor implementation to [decide which protocol to use](https://github.com/web-platform-tests/wpt/pull/48618/files#diff-c2f15328bc1ddfa8fb93c09ae41651e2bcfdad4f257932263a3e92c3f8deffceR248).

#### Lint rules

Some lint rules has to be added to verify is used correctly:
* It is unique per test file.
* It has the correct value (either `true` or `false`).

> ### Deprecating of the `require_webdriver_bidi` metadata tag

Reviewer: this does not seem applicable to this RFC?

## Details

### Examples

[html test](https://github.com/web-platform-tests/wpt/blob/117958ef4317d8ed16e9ea6ae63da30262f3b875/infrastructure/webdriver/bidi/subscription.html#L6)
```javascript
...
<script src="/resources/testdriver.js?feature=bidi"></script>
...
```
[javascript test](https://github.com/web-platform-tests/wpt/blob/117958ef4317d8ed16e9ea6ae63da30262f3b875/infrastructure/webdriver/bidi/subscription.window.js#L2)
```javascript
...
// META: script=/resources/testdriver.js?feature=bidi
...
```

### Required changes

#### Configure testdriver.js based on the `?feature` flag

> The `testdriver.js` checks if the `?feature=bidi` query parameter was included using [document.currentScript.src](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Document/currentScript) like in the [prototype](https://github.com/web-platform-tests/wpt/pull/49122/files#diff-1fe2b624679a3150e5c86f84682c5901b715dad750096a524e8cb23939e5590fR16). If `bidi` was not enabled, a [descriptive error will be thrown](https://github.com/web-platform-tests/wpt/pull/49122/files#diff-1fe2b624679a3150e5c86f84682c5901b715dad750096a524e8cb23939e5590fR22).

Reviewer 2: We need to document in the RFC what the actual syntax of `feature` is. For example is it allowed to supply it multiple times, or is it a (e.g. comma) separated list?

Reviewer 2: I think we need to specify, and implement, the extension to multiple query parameters now. Otherwise if someone does use this for something internal they might pick a different approach and then we'll be stuck.

I don't think you need to answer any of the other questions. Just specify that for forwards compatibility multiple feature parameters are permitted in the query string and matches are based on exact string match.

#### Add `testrdriver_features` to TestharnessTest

This RFC proposes adding `testrdriver_features` to [`TestharnessTest`](https://github.com/web-platform-tests/wpt/pull/49122/files#diff-8f280b64b0700ab9b4b343adabc7ff4d5ea4b1f45cb6c4bd7f50a19b21ebdb8cR169) so that executors can get the list of features declared by a test. The list is populated by parsing the `feature` query param from the `testdriver.js` imports used by a test. Currently, only the `bidi` feature is supported.

#### (implementation-specific) Set up WebDriver BiDi in the test executor if needed

Even though the `TestExecutor` needs information about whether to activate BiDi or not at `connect`, which happens before the runner receives the test to run, the configuration can be done at the point [the browser is configured](https://github.com/web-platform-tests/wpt/pull/49122/files#diff-0df24b5b583c460182e687f7dc7a6a79dd2cd3389bc4a96f48483f60fceb51f7R275). This data can be used later by the specific executor implementation to [decide which protocol to use](https://github.com/web-platform-tests/wpt/pull/49122/files#diff-0df24b5b583c460182e687f7dc7a6a79dd2cd3389bc4a96f48483f60fceb51f7R275).

> ## Risks

Reviewer 2: A risk that isn't documented here is that testdriver may be used in a subresource, in which case both the top-level resource and the subresource both need to specify the same set of features. This is hard to lint (since we don't have a total graph of subresource usage). The worst case scenario would be if the subresource allowed use of the bidi APIs without the top-level test opting in (e.g. in tests authored against implementations where the flag is a no-op in wptrunner). I think we can avoid this for now, since all testdriver commands go through the top level script, but that will hopefully change in the future (ironically only once we can use BiDi for wptrunner itself).

Author: Good point, added it.

> ### Having `testrdriver_features` in the `Test` is not sufficient

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Having `testdriver_features` in the `Test` is not sufficient
```

# RFC 214: Add testdriver features

## Summary

This RFC is an alternative to [RFC 212](https://github.com/web-platform-tests/rfcs/pull/212) providing a more generic and extendable solution. It proposes adding a query parameter `?feature` to `testdriver.js` and adding a `testdriver_features` property to the [TestharnessTest](https://github.com/web-platform-tests/wpt/pull/49122/files#diff-8f280b64b0700ab9b4b343adabc7ff4d5ea4b1f45cb6c4bd7f50a19b21ebdb8cR169). At the moment the only supported feature will be `bidi`, which will be used to enable the [testdriver BiDi API](https://github.com/web-platform-tests/rfcs/blob/master/rfcs/testdriver_bidi.md) for specific WPT tests. The feature `bidi`, applicable to HTML and JS files, would let test runners choose between [**WebDriverProtocol**](https://github.com/web-platform-tests/wpt/pull/49122/files#diff-c2f15328bc1ddfa8fb93c09ae41651e2bcfdad4f257932263a3e92c3f8deffceR277) and [**WebDriverBidiProtocol**](https://github.com/web-platform-tests/wpt/pull/49122/files#diff-c2f15328bc1ddfa8fb93c09ae41651e2bcfdad4f257932263a3e92c3f8deffceR279). This approach does not require all the browsers to implement WebDriver BiDi.

> The query parameter `feature` currently supports only the `bidi` feature. Future implementations may allow for multiple `feature` parameters, such as `testdriver.js?feature=bidi&feature=SOME_OTHER_FEATURE`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The query parameter `feature` takes a single value, which is a string representing a feature name. Feature names are compared by case-sensitive string matching. Multiple features are represented as multiple `feature` parameters for example `testdriver.js?feature=bidi&feature=SOME_OTHER_FEATURE`. This RFC only defines the `bidi` feature; future RFCs may add additional features.
```

Reviewer 2: I would also suggest that we explicitly state that any features added by vendors for their own tests must contain a `:` in the name; then we can write a lint that only permitted features are being used and so catch `feature=BiDi` or similar.

Author: > I would also suggest that we explicitly state that any features added by vendors for their own tests must contain a `:` in the name; then we can write a lint that only permitted features are being used and so catch `feature=BiDi` or similar.

I believe it makes sense not only to allow for extension features, but for extension query parameters, which is implemented in the prototype lint rules for [query parameters](https://github.com/web-platform-tests/wpt/pull/49122/files#diff-b3de46e07408c6a68229472f80ec0f23d8a7ff634bc01b25f51ff054478dcc60R554) and [features](https://github.com/web-platform-tests/wpt/pull/49122/files#diff-b3de46e07408c6a68229472f80ec0f23d8a7ff634bc01b25f51ff054478dcc60R562).

Author: Added this description to the RFC.

Author: > I believe it makes sense not only to allow for extension features, but for extension query parameters, which is implemented in the prototype lint rules for [query parameters](https://github.com/web-platform-tests/wpt/pull/49122/files#diff-b3de46e07408c6a68229472f80ec0f23d8a7ff634bc01b25f51ff054478dcc60R554) and [features](https://github.com/web-platform-tests/wpt/pull/49122/files#diff-b3de46e07408c6a68229472f80ec0f23d8a7ff634bc01b25f51ff054478dcc60R562).

After some further consideration, I don't think we should allow for any vendor-specific query parameters at least for now. If required, this can be changed in another RFC.
